<!-- TODO: https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Formatting -->

<pre>
  BIP: bip-lookup_output
  Layer: Consensus (soft fork)
  Title: OP_LOOKUP_OUTPUT
  Author: Runchao Han <runchao.han@monash.edu>
          Haoyu Lin <chris.haoyul@gmail.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI:
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created:
  License: BSD-3-Clause
           CC0-1.0
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP describes a new opcode (OP_LOOKUP_OUTPUT) for the Bitcoin scripting system that allowing a transaction output's owner to be looked up.

==Summary==

OP_LOOKUP_OUTPUT takes the id of an output, and produces the address of the output’s owner.

==Motivation==

Atomic swap protocols which exchange two different currencies (on different blockchains) can introduce an optionality. The initior can abort the deal without receiving any penalty. Such a problem is known as Free Option Problem as described in:

* https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Atomic_swap#Financial_optionality
* https://blog.bitmex.com/atomic-swaps-and-distributed-exchanges-the-inadvertent-call-option/
* https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2018-May/001292.html
* https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2018-December/001752.html

To resolve this problem, the unfair behaviour should receive punishment. To apply the punishment, it requires that, besides the asset used to exchange, the initiator must put some asset as collateral, which is in fact premium. The transaction for the premium needs to be locked with the same secret hash but with a flipped payout, i.e. when redeemed with the secret, the premium goes back to the initiator and after timelock, the premium goes to the participant as a compensation for initiator not revealing the secret. However, this introduces a new problem: the participant can get the premium without paying anything, by never participating in.

To resolve the new problem, the owner of a refered output needs to be known, and then it can be decided whether the initiator or the participant could take the premium.

===Interaction===

A more fair atomic swap protocol has following steps:

1.Initiate

The initiator initiates the contract.

First, the initiator picks a random secret _s_ only known to itself, and computes the secure hash _h_ of _s_.

Then, the initiator creates an HTLC script contract_1 as described in [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0199.mediawiki bip-0199]:

<blockquote>
<p>The initiator pays amount_1 coin_1 from the initiator itself to the participant only if the participant can provide the preimage <em>s</em> to the hash <em>h</em> by a timelock <em>t1</em>. After <em>t1</em>, the initiator can refund the money - get amount_1 coin_1 back.</p>
</blockquote>

bip-0199 also provides a sample contract.

After creating contract_1, the initiator publishes contract_1 as a transaction transaction_1 on blockchain_1.

Then, with the published _h_ in transaction_1, the initiator also creates another HTLC script contract_2 on blockchain_2:

<blockquote>
<p>The participant pays amount_2 coin_2 from the participant to the initiator only if the initiator can provide secret <em>s</em> by a timelock <em>t2</em>. After the time of <em>t2</em>, the participant can refund the money - get amount_2 coin_2 back.</p>
</blockquote>

Here _t2_ should expire before _t1_.

After creating contract_2, the initiator publishes contract_2 as a transaction transaction_2 on blockchain_2.

Note that the initiator knows _s_ so it can redeem amount_2 coin_2 in transaction_2 anytime before _t2_, but the participant cannot redeem amount_1 coin_1 in transaction_1 because the preimage _s_ has not been revealed to participant yet.

To resolve the arbitrage, a premium contract is introduced:

> The initiator pays amount_premium coin_2 to the participant if the participant refunds amount_2 coin_2 after _t2_ and before _t1_. If _t1_ expires, the initiator can refund amount_premium back.

This also implies the initiator need to owe some amount of coin_2 first.

As we need to know the status of amount_2 coin_2, whether it has been refunded by the participant or been redeemed by the initiator, the new opcode OP_LOOKUP_OUTPUT needs to be used.

A sample implementation for premium in bitcoin script is:
<!-- TODO:  OP_DUP OP_HASH160 <initiator_pubkeyhash>? -->
```
ScriptSig:
    Redeem: <participant_sig> <participant_pubkey> 1
    Refund: <initiator_sig> <initiator_pubkey> 0
ScriptPubKey:
    OP_IF // Normal redeem path
        // the owner of <asset2_output> (the amount_2 coin_2 in contract_2) should be the initiator
        // which means the initiator has redeemed asset2
        <asset2_output> OP_LOOKUP_OUTPUT <initiator_pubkeyhash> OP_EQUALVERIFY 
        OP_DUP OP_HASH160 <participant_pubkey>
    OP_ELSE // Refund path
        // the premium timelock should be expired
        <locktime> OP_CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY OP_DROP
        OP_DUP OP_HASH160 <initiator_pubkeyhash>
    OP_ENDIF
    OP_EQUALVERIFY
    OP_CHECKSIG
```

Then the initiator also publish the premium contract onto blockchain_2.

2.Participate

The participant decides whether to participate in the contracts by auditing transaction_1 and transaction_2. If the participant thinks contracts are fair, it will choose to participate by signing transaction_2 and spending amount_2 coin_2.

3.Redeem and Refund

The initiator can choose either to redeem amount_2 coin_2 or refund amount_1 coin_1.

Note that both Redeeming and Refunding are atomic:
if the initiator chooses to redeem amount_2 coin_2, the participant can also redeem amount_1 coin_1;
if the initiator chooses to refund amount_1 coin_1, the participant can also refund amount_2 coin_2.

__Redeem:__
The initiator redeems amount_2 coin_2 by publishing secret _s_, then the participant can also redeem amount_1 coin_1 with the published secret _s_.

First, the initiator provides secret _s_ to transaction_2 in order to redeem amount_2 coin_2 in transaction_2.
As a result, the initiator redeems amount_2 coin_2, but exposes secret _s_ to the participant.
After that, the participant provides secret _s_ to transaction_1 in order to redeem amount_1 coin_1 in transaction_1.
In this way, the initiator and the participant successfully exchanges amount_1 coin_1 and amount_2 coin_2.

__Refund:__
If the initiator does not reveal secret _s_ and does not redeem amount_2 coin_2 after _t2_ expires, which means the initiator may be a malicious one and may be trying to make arbitrage by aborting the contract, the participant can refund its amount_2 coin_2. As a result, the initiator cannot redeem amount_2 coin_2 anymore. To punish this arbitrage, amount_premium coin_2 will also be transfered from the initiator to the participant under such a scenario.

Once _t1_ expires, the initiator can also refund its amount_1 coin_1 if the participant didn't participate. 

As long as the initiator doesn't misbehave, i.e., 
1. the initiator is an honest one but it is the participant who choose not to participate, making the deal aborted; or
2. the initiator does reveal secret _s_ and the deal does not get aborted, the initior can refund amount_premium coin_2 at the end.

==Rationale==

Implementing OP_LOOKUP_OUTPUT is easy in Bitcoin - it only queries the ownership of an output from the indexed blockchain database.

This neither introduces computation overhead, nor breaks the "stateless" design of the Bitcoin script.

==Backwards Compatibility==

As adding this opcode will not affect the way how existing HTLCs work, there is no need for backward compatibility. This opcode is indeed aiming at providing the new ability of a more fair atomic swap.

==Reference Implementation==

<!-- TODO -->

==Copyright==

This document is placed in the public domain.